Tutorial 1 for Orleans 2.0 (#5102)
dotnet/orleans: src/Documentation/tutorials_and_samples/tutorial_1_helloworld.md

| `EndpointOptions` | This tells the silo where to listen. For this example, we are using a `loopback`. |
| `ConfigureApplicationParts` | Adds the assembly with grain classes to the application setup. |

After loading the configurations, the SiloHost is built and then started asynchronously.

## Configuring the client

Similar to the silo, the client is configured via `ClientBuilder` and a similar collection of option classes.

```csharp
        private static async Task<IClusterClient> StartClientWithRetries()
        {
            attempt = 0;
            IClusterClient client;
            client = new ClientBuilder()
                .UseLocalhostClustering()
                .Configure<ClusterOptions>(options =>
                {
                    options.ClusterId = "dev";
                    options.ServiceId = "HelloWorldApp";
                })
                .ConfigureLogging(logging => logging.AddConsole())
                .Build();

            await client.Connect(RetryFilter);
            Console.WriteLine("Client successfully connect to silo host");
            return client;

>         }

Reviewer: also if we could paste the client program here, that would be helpful for people to figure out the flow of this sample, which you described in "How parts work together" 

```
private static async Task DoClientWork(IClusterClient client)
        {
            // example of calling grains from the initialized client
            var friend = client.GetGrain<IHello>(0);
            var response = await friend.SayHello("Good morning, my friend!");
            Console.WriteLine("\n\n{0}\n\n", response);
        }
```

ofc please explain what this block of code is doing.

Author: I put the code closer to the section that explains the process. I think it should make a lot more sense now.

---
layout: page
title: Tutorial 1 Hello World
---

# Tutorial 1: Hello World

This process ties into the Hello World sample application available [here](https://github.com/dotnet/orleans/tree/master/Samples/2.0/HelloWorld).
The important concepts to get out of this tutorial are:

> Orleans is not a single, standalone application that you download and install.

Reviewer: this line indicates that we are assuming people might think Orleans is a single, standalone application. But I haven't seen people confuse Orleans with a single standalone application yet. So personally I don't think we should start with this, I'm afraid this may offend people.

> Orleans is a collection of separate, configurable projects that use NuGet packages to add Orleans functionality to another application.

Reviewer: this isn't accurate, Orleans provides nugets to install orleans to your application. Orleans aren't projects per se.

Author: Since line 11 was further explanation for line 10, I removed it.

            var builder = new SiloHostBuilder()
                .UseLocalhostClustering()
                .Configure<ClusterOptions>(options =>
                {
                    options.ClusterId = "dev";
                    options.ServiceId = "HelloWorldApp";
                })
                .Configure<EndpointOptions>(options => options.AdvertisedIPAddress = IPAddress.Loopback)
                .ConfigureApplicationParts(parts => parts.AddApplicationPart(typeof(HelloGrain).Assembly).WithReferences())
                .ConfigureLogging(logging => logging.AddConsole());

            var host = builder.Build();
            await host.StartAsync();
            return host;
        }
```

| Option | Used for |
|-------------|----------|
| `.UseLocalhostClustering()` | Declaring that we are using a single local silo |
| `ClusterOptions` | ClusterId is the name for the Orleans cluster must be the same for silo and client so they can talk to each other. ServiceId is the ID used for the application and it must not change across deployments|
| `EndpointOptions` | This tells the silo where to listen. For this example, we are using a `loopback`. |

> | `ConfigureApplicationParts` | Adds the assembly with grain classes to the application setup. |

Author: I may need some clarification about this.

> | `ConfigureApplicationParts` | Adds the assembly with grain classes to the application setup. |

Reviewer: oh that's what ConfigureApplicationParts is doing.

> | `ConfigureApplicationParts` | Adds the assembly with grain classes to the application setup. |

Author: Okay. Thank you!

```csharp
        private static async Task<IClusterClient> StartClientWithRetries()
        {
            attempt = 0;
            IClusterClient client;
            client = new ClientBuilder()
                .UseLocalhostClustering()
                .Configure<ClusterOptions>(options =>
                {
                    options.ClusterId = "dev";
                    options.ServiceId = "HelloWorldApp";
                })
                .ConfigureLogging(logging => logging.AddConsole())
                .Build();

            await client.Connect(RetryFilter);
            Console.WriteLine("Client successfully connect to silo host");
            return client;
        }

```

| Option | Used for |
|-------------|----------|
| `.UseLocalhostClustering()` | Same as for SiloHost |
| `ClusterOptions` | Same as for SiloHost |

A more in-depth guide to configuring your client can be found [in the Client Configuration section of the Configuration Guide.](http://dotnet.github.io/orleans/Documentation/clusters_and_clients/configuration_guide/client_configuration.html)

## Writing a grain

> Grains are the building blocks of an Orleans application, and you can read more about them in the [Core Concepts section of the Orleans documentation.](http://dotnet.github.io/orleans/Documentation/core_concepts/index.html)

Reviewer: Can we put the whole first paragraph here : 

Grains are the key primitives of the Orleans programming model. Grains are the building blocks of an Orleans application, they are atomic units of isolation, distribution, and persistence. Grains are objects that represent application entities. Just like in the classic Object Oriented Programming, a grain encapsulates state of an entity and encodes its behavior in the code logic. Grains can hold references to each other and interact by invoking each other’s methods exposed via interfaces. 

IMO We need to at least give an overview here to get people's eyes on what grains are and catch their attention. Otehrwise this single line doesn't really give much attraction or useful info.

Author: Yes I have added the paragraph (and kept the link.)

This is the main body of code for the Hello World grain:

```csharp
[...]
namespace HelloWorld.Grains
{
    public class HelloGrain : Orleans.Grain, IHello
    {
        Task<string> IHello.SayHello(string greeting)
        {
            logger.LogInformation($"SayHello message received: greeting = '{greeting}'");
            return Task.FromResult($"You said: '{greeting}', I say: Hello!");
        }
    }
}
```

A grain class implements one or more grain interfaces, as you can read [here, in the Grains section.](http://dotnet.github.io/orleans/Documentation/grains/index.html))

```csharp
[...]
namespace HelloWorld.Interfaces
{
    public interface IHello : Orleans.IGrainWithIntegerKey
    {
        Task<string> SayHello(string greeting);
    }
}

```

## How the parts work together

SiloHost is started first.
Then, OrleansClient is started.
OrleansClient creates a reference to the IHello grain and calls its SayHello() method through its interface, IHello.

> This programming model is built as part of our core concept of distributed Object Oriented Programming.

Reviewer: I think this line belows to previous line?

Next, the grain is activated in the silo.

> OrleansClient sends a greeting to the activated grain.

Reviewer: OreansClient calls the activated grain's greeting method, which activates the grain in the silo. 

Since grain doesn't get activated by client creating reference for it, it is activated if the client calls it through its reference.

Author: ```csharp
        Task<string> IHello.SayHello(string greeting)
        {
            logger.LogInformation($"SayHello message received: greeting = '{greeting}'");
            return Task.FromResult($"You said: '{greeting}', I say: Hello!");
        }
```

SayHello() accepts a greeting and returns the Task<string>.

Maybe this is a good place to mention that.

The grain returns a response to OrleansClient, which OrleansClient displays on the console.

> ## Create the project structure

Reviewer: I don't think we need this section, the sample code is enought for users to figure out this. Maybe change this section to "How ro run the sample", and link the [readme file](https://github.com/dotnet/orleans/blob/master/Samples/2.1/HelloWorld/Readme.md) in the sample.

Author: Yes, I will do this, but at this point, this document is an overview for the sample app, and not a collection of steps, like a "traditional" tutorial..

Grains can hold references to each other and interact by invoking each other’s methods exposed via interfaces.

You can read more about them in the [Core Concepts section of the Orleans documentation.](http://dotnet.github.io/orleans/Documentation/core_concepts/index.html)

This is the main body of code for the Hello World grain:

```csharp
[...]
namespace HelloWorld.Grains
{
    public class HelloGrain : Orleans.Grain, IHello
    {
        Task<string> IHello.SayHello(string greeting)
        {
            logger.LogInformation($"SayHello message received: greeting = '{greeting}'");
            return Task.FromResult($"You said: '{greeting}', I say: Hello!");
        }
    }
}
```

A grain class implements one or more grain interfaces, as you can read [here, in the Grains section.](http://dotnet.github.io/orleans/Documentation/grains/index.html))

```csharp
[...]
namespace HelloWorld.Interfaces
{
    public interface IHello : Orleans.IGrainWithIntegerKey
    {
        Task<string> SayHello(string greeting);
    }
}

```

## How the parts work together

This programming model is built as part of our core concept of distributed Object Oriented Programming.

> SiloHost is run first.

Reviewer: is run? is this grammar correct? 
should it be "is started" ?

Author: It is correct, but it looks awkward. I'll put "is started" back.

Author: I did the same to the next line about the client, too.

Then, the OrleansClient program is run.
The Main method of OrleansClient calls the method that starts the client, `StartClientWithRetries().`
The client is passed to the `DoClientWork()` method.

```csharp

        private static async Task DoClientWork(IClusterClient client)
        {
            // example of calling grains from the initialized client
            var friend = client.GetGrain<IHello>(0);
            var response = await friend.SayHello("Good morning, my friend!");
            Console.WriteLine("\n\n{0}\n\n", response);
        }

```

At this point, OrleansClient creates a reference to the IHello grain and calls its SayHello() method through its interface, IHello.

> Because of this reference, the grain is activated in the silo.

Reviewer: not because of the reference, but because the call.

Reviewer: how about "the call would activate the grain in silo"

Author: Okay! Fixed.

OrleansClient sends a greeting to the activated grain.

> The grain returns a Task string to OrleansClient, which OrleansClient displays on the console.

Reviewer: `Task` is not a string, "Task string" is technically incorrect. 

I think "the grain returns the greeting string back to the orleans client, which OrleansClient displays on the console" is good.

Author: I wanted to avoid using the word "greeting" here because that's the name of the string being sent to the grain...

```csharp
    public class HelloGrain : Orleans.Grain, IHello
    {
        Task<string> IHello.SayHello(string greeting)
        {
            logger.LogInformation($"SayHello message received: greeting = '{greeting}'");
            return Task.FromResult($"You said: '{greeting}', I say: Hello!");
        }
    ```

Instead, I put the word "response" in there because that's the name of the string being returned and displayed.

Does this seem clearer?

Author: So now that whole section looks like this:

At this point, OrleansClient creates a reference to the IHello grain and calls its SayHello() method through its interface, IHello.
This call activates the grain in the silo.
OrleansClient sends a greeting to the activated grain.
The grain returns a response string to OrleansClient, which OrleansClient displays on the console.

Author: The line now reads...

The grain returns the greeting as a response to OrleansClient, which OrleansClient displays on the console.

:)

---
layout: page
title: Tutorial 1 Hello World
---

# Tutorial 1: Hello World

This process recreates the same Hello World sample application available [here](https://github.com/dotnet/orleans/tree/master/Samples/2.0/HelloWorld).

## Overview of the parts

> This application consists of a solution that contains four projects: SiloHost, OrleansClient, HelloWorld.Interfaces, and HelloWorld.Grains.

Reviewer: can we add sections doing overview for grain and grain interface concepts? This is the first tutorial our new user would see, it would be great if we can briefly touch grain and grain interface concepts, link it to its doc page. These two concepts are what our new users will be most interested in.

Author: Yes! I have paraphrased some of the info from the Grain and Grain Interface pages and linked them.

We will create the SiloHost and OrleansClient projects as .NET Core App files and we will create the HelloWorld.Interfaces and HelloWorld.Grains projects as .NET Standard Libraries.
Orleans comes into the picture when we add the NuGet packages to each of these four projects and replace the default code with the Orleans code provided in this tutorial.
Finally, we will configure the dependency references among the projects before building and running the solution.

## How the parts work together

SiloHost is started first.

> Then, OrleansClient is started. OrleansClient tells the system to create a grain based on the grain interface provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, OrleansClient is started. OrleansClient will creates a reference to a IHello grain,  and call its SayHello() method through its interface IHello. This programming model is built as part of our core concept of distributed Object Oriented Programming```

Author: I edited the file directly, rather than using the "Apply suggestion" button.

The final version of that section looks like this:

> SiloHost is started first.
> Then, OrleansClient is started.
> OrleansClient creates a reference to the IHello grain and calls its SayHello() method through its interface, IHello.
> This programming model is built as part of our core concept of distributed Object Oriented Programming.
> Next, the grain is activated in the silo.
> OrleansClient sends a greeting to the activated grain.
> The grain returns a response to OrleansClient, which OrleansClient displays on the console.

Reviewer: that's ok. I was trying out the Suggestion feature, never seen it before :D

> The grain is then stored in SiloHost. OrleansClient sends a greeting to the grain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the OrleansClient call to the grain reference would then activate the grain in the silo host. And the activated grain would then process SayHello() call
```

grains are activated, not stored.

Author: Thanks! I will change any other wording like that, as I come across it.

The grain returns a response to OrleansClient, which OrleansClient displays on the console.

## Step One: Create the project structure

1. In Visual Studio, create a new Visual C# Console App (.NET Core) project.
2. Name the project **SiloHost** and name the solution **HelloWorld**.
3. Add a second .NET Core Console App project to the HelloWorld solution and name it **OrleansClient**.
4. Add another new project, but this time choose .NET Standard – Class Library. Name it **HelloWorld.Interfaces**.
5. Add a new interface class file to the GrainInterfaces folder and name it **IHello**.
  *Note: If  Visual Studio adds a default class named `Class1.cs`, feel free to delete this file to keep things tidy.
6. For the fourth and final project, add another .NET Standard – Class Library project and name it **HelloWorld.Grains**.
7. Inside the Grains project, add a class and name it **HelloGrain.cs**.

The structure of your Solution should look like this:

```

> Solution 'HelloWorld' (4 projects)

Reviewer: I don't think we need to detail all the dependency and solution structure. We already provided this information in the Sample code. We can just provide a link to the HelloWorld sample, and that would be clear enough IMO.

Author: Okay. :)

> HelloWorld.Grains
  > Dependencies
  > HelloGrain.cs
> HelloWorld.Interfaces
  > Dependencies
  > IHello.cs
> OrleansClient
  > Dependencies
  > Program.cs
> SiloHost
  > Dependencies
  > Program.cs

```

> ## Step Two: Add Orleans Packages using NuGet

Reviewer: same here. already provided in the sample code

- HelloWorld.Interfaces

1. To add a dependency, right-click the project and select **Add…** -> **Reference…**.
2. Check the boxes for the projects you need and click **OK.**

## Step Four: Replace the default code

### SiloHost - Program.cs

```csharp
using System;
using System.Net;
using System.Threading.Tasks;
using HelloWorld.Grains;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Logging;
using Orleans;
using Orleans.Configuration;
using Orleans.Hosting;

namespace OrleansSiloHost
{
    public class Program
    {
        public static int Main(string[] args)
        {
            return RunMainAsync().Result;
        }

        private static async Task<int> RunMainAsync()
        {
            try
            {
                var host = await StartSilo();
                Console.WriteLine("Press Enter to terminate...");
                Console.ReadLine();

                await host.StopAsync();

                return 0;
            }
            catch (Exception ex)
            {
                Console.WriteLine(ex);
                return 1;
            }
        }

        private static async Task<ISiloHost> StartSilo()
        {
            // define the cluster configuration

>             var builder = new SiloHostBuilder()

Reviewer: no need to paste the whole file, as in it is in sample code as well. It is more important here to describe how to use SiloHostBuilder to configure a silo. So maybe just keep this block of code, and add annotation for it.

Author: Thanks!

    }
}

```

### OrleansClient - Program.cs

```csharp
using HelloWorld.Interfaces;
using Orleans;
using Orleans.Runtime;
using System;
using System.Threading.Tasks;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Logging;
using Orleans.Configuration;

namespace OrleansClient
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Orleans test silo client
    /// </summary>
    public class Program
    {
        const int initializeAttemptsBeforeFailing = 5;
        private static int attempt = 0;

        static int Main(string[] args)
        {
            return RunMainAsync().Result;
        }

        private static async Task<int> RunMainAsync()
        {
            try
            {
                using (var client = await StartClientWithRetries())
                {
                    await DoClientWork(client);
                    Console.ReadKey();
                }

                return 0;
            }
            catch (Exception e)
            {
                Console.WriteLine(e);
                Console.ReadKey();
                return 1;
            }
        }

        private static async Task<IClusterClient> StartClientWithRetries()
        {
            attempt = 0;
            IClusterClient client;

>             client = new ClientBuilder()

Reviewer: same here. Please keep in mind, this tutorial would be paired with HelloWorld sample, so we don't need to duplicate information already provided here. Tutorial is a good place to explain key points about the sample, providing information which wasn't there. Such as how to use ClientBuilder.

Author: I removed the copied code.

                .Configure<ClusterOptions>(options =>
                {
                    options.ClusterId = "dev";
                    options.ServiceId = "HelloWorldApp";
                })
                .ConfigureLogging(logging => logging.AddConsole())
                .Build();

            await client.Connect(RetryFilter);
            Console.WriteLine("Client successfully connect to silo host");
            return client;
        }

        private static async Task<bool> RetryFilter(Exception exception)
        {
            if (exception.GetType() != typeof(SiloUnavailableException))
            {
                Console.WriteLine($"Cluster client failed to connect to cluster with unexpected error.  Exception: {exception}");
                return false;
            }
            attempt++;
            Console.WriteLine($"Cluster client attempt {attempt} of {initializeAttemptsBeforeFailing} failed to connect to cluster.  Exception: {exception}");
            if (attempt > initializeAttemptsBeforeFailing)
            {
                return false;
            }
            await Task.Delay(TimeSpan.FromSeconds(4));
            return true;
        }

>         private static async Task DoClientWork(IClusterClient client)

Reviewer: probably should keep this as well, since it touches how to get a grain reference and make calls to it.

Reviewer: I noticed that this part has been removed . why is that?

        {
            // example of calling grains from the initialized client
            var friend = client.GetGrain<IHello>(0);
            var response = await friend.SayHello("Good morning, my friend!");
            Console.WriteLine("\n\n{0}\n\n", response);
        }
    }
}

```

### HelloWorld.Interfaces - IHello.cs

```csharp

> using System.Threading.Tasks;

Reviewer: code about Hello and IHello is good to keep, maybe lose the `using .xxx` line, which is not very relavant. 

move these to the overview where you provide overview about grain and grain interface concepts, as an example for the concepts.

namespace HelloWorld.Interfaces
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Orleans grain communication interface IHello
    /// </summary>
    public interface IHello : Orleans.IGrainWithIntegerKey
    {
        Task<string> SayHello(string greeting);
    }
}

```

### HelloWorld.Grain - HelloGrain.cs

```csharp
using HelloWorld.Interfaces;
using System.Threading.Tasks;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Logging;

namespace HelloWorld.Grains
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Orleans grain implementation class HelloGrain.
    /// </summary>
    public class HelloGrain : Orleans.Grain, IHello
    {
        private readonly ILogger logger;

        public HelloGrain(ILogger<HelloGrain> logger)
        {
            this.logger = logger;
        }  

        Task<string> IHello.SayHello(string greeting)
        {
            logger.LogInformation($"SayHello message received: greeting = '{greeting}'");
            return Task.FromResult($"You said: '{greeting}', I say: Hello!");
        }
    }
}

```

## Step Five: Deploy the Solution

> ### Using Visual Studio

Reviewer: these are duplicated informaton with HelloWorldSample/ReadMe.md. I think we can move those to the HelloWorldSample/ReadMe.md, for two reasons IMO 
- so people who are just looking at the sample code will know how to run it. Not everyone read docs. Keep it with sample code make the sample more complete 
- to keep toturial precise and to the point. I think the goal for this tutorial is, pairing with the sample code, giving people a intro to orleans core concepts, which is grain, silo and client

---
layout: page
title: Tutorial 1 Hello World
---

# Tutorial 1: Hello World

This process recreates the same Hello World sample application available [here](https://github.com/dotnet/orleans/tree/master/Samples/2.0/HelloWorld).

## Overview of the parts

This application consists of a solution that contains four projects: SiloHost, OrleansClient, HelloWorld.Interfaces, and HelloWorld.Grains.

```csharp
[...]
        private static async Task<ISiloHost> StartSilo()
        { 
            // define the cluster configuration 

>             var builder = new SiloHostBuilder()

Reviewer: I apologize, when I commented about the silo config part, I meant this line, and the lines attached to this line after it... 

I realize it might be confusing....

Same with client config. Did you deleted client config ?
